# Bear River Basin Management

The water allocation and management in the Bear River Basin are governed by an interconnected framework of interstate compacts, federal legislation, court decrees, state water laws, and administrative institutions.

## Historic Legal Foundations of Bear River Water Rights

1.  **Dietrich Decree (1920):** Adjudicated water rights in Idaho and recognized PacifiCorp priority over most downstream users, and the right to release water from Bear Lake electricity generation and irrigation or other beneficial purposes. It also authorized the storage of up to 5,500 cfs of Bear River water ([Read more](https://bearrivercommission.org/docs/Dietrich%20Decree.pdf)).
2.  **Kimball Decree (1922):** The decree further quantified and prioritized water rights in Utah and reaffirmed PacifiCorp’s rights to divert and store Bear River and Bear Lake.

    Neither decree specified limits on Bear Lake elevations or total storage volume. These decrees remain integral to water administration, particularly regarding storage, diversion, and priority enforcement [(Read more](https://bearrivercommission.org/docs/Kimball%20Decree.pdf)).

## Agreements and Settlements

1.  **Bear River Compact (1958):** It is the central interstate agreement among Utah, Wyoming, and Idaho that governs the allocation and use of the waters of the Bear River across the states. The Compact divides the river into Upper, Central and Lower Divisions and sets limits on water depletions. It also established the [Bear River Commission](https://bearrivercommission.org/) to administer the agreement and resolve disputes. Overall, the Compact helps coordinate water development and protect water rights within the Bear River Basin. ([Read more](https://waterrights.utah.gov/techinfo/bearrivc/history.html)).
2.  **Amended Bear River Compact (1980):** The amended compact was aimed to prevent then and future disputes over water distribution, ensure efficient multi-purpose use of the river’s water, allow for further water resource development, promote cooperation among the states, and achieve an equitable allocation of Bear River waters among the compacting states. It granted additional storage above Bear Lake of 74,500 acre feet of storage (35,000 acre feet each for UT and WY and 4,500 acre feet for ID), depletions restricted at 28,000 acre feet [(Read more](https://bearrivercommission.org/docs/BEAR%20RIVER%20COMPACT.pdf)).
3.  **Operations Agreement (2000):** Agreement between PacifiCorp, Idaho, Utah and Wyoming, to assent to general operations of Bear Lake and hydroelectric dams downstream from Bear Lake. The parties agreed that Bear Lake would be operated primarily as a storage reservoir to satisfy existing contracts and for the flood control needs of the three States. Future operations would be constrained to not make deliveries exclusively for hydropower production ([Read more](https://bearrivercommission.org/docs/Operations%20Agreement%20for%20PacifiCorps%20Bear%20River%20System.pdf)).
4.  **Bear Lake Settlement Agreement (2004):** Recognizes PacifiCorp’s decreed rights to divert Bear River water and to store in Bear Lake between elevations 5,902 and 5,923.65 feet for irrigation, power and other beneficial uses. Authorized an irrigation allocation schedule between 5,914.7 ft and 5,902 ft. Any unused storage allocation to be preserved for Bear Lake recovery for future use by the contract holders ([Read more](https://bearrivercommission.org/docs/Amended%20and%20Restated%20Bear%20Lake%20Settlement%20Agreement.pdf)).
